“I am so sorry.”
“It’s my fault, please forgive me.”
No matter how we phrase it,
it can be difficult to apologize.
Why is that so challenging?
There are many reasons:
We may fear confrontation,
blame, or rejection.
Perhaps we feel embarrassed,
and we’re too proud to apologize.
We may reason, ‘Apologizing will not undo
the blunder I’ve already made.’
And it may even be that we are angry.
This is such a matter of concern
that “in July 2000,
“the California State Legislature
in the United States
“passed a bill designed
to relieve people of liability
“if they express sympathy to an individual
who was injured in an accident
“in which they
themselves were involved. . . .
“It was noted that . . . people
often hesitate to extend an apology
“[out of concern that]
it could be construed in court
as an admission of guilt.”
The Bible provides an account
of a faithful servant,
the apostle Paul,
who was a good example
of one who apologized.
The account is
in the book of Acts chapter 23.
The setting: A Roman military officer
wanted to know why Paul
was being accused by the Jews.
So he brought Paul
to the Jewish chief priests
and commanded the Sanhedrin,
the high court, to assemble.
As we read Acts 23:1-5 together,
we can’t help but be impressed
by Paul’s boldness
as he stands for what is right.
But at the same time,
please take note of his humility.
Acts 23:1: “Looking intently
at the Sanhedrin,
“Paul said: ‘Men, brothers,
“‘I have behaved before God
“with a perfectly clear conscience
down to this day.’
“At this the high priest Ananias
“ordered those standing by him
to strike him on the mouth.
“Then Paul said to him:
“‘God is going to strike you,
you whitewashed wall.
“‘Do you sit to judge me according to the Law
“‘and at the same time violate the Law
“by commanding me to be struck?’
“Those standing by said:
“‘Are you insulting the high priest of God?’
“And Paul said: ‘Brothers,
“‘I did not know he was high priest.
“‘For it is written,
“You must not speak injuriously
of a ruler of your people.”’”
Paul immediately admitted his error.
What he had said,
that the one appointed as judge
should not resort to violence, was right.
Yet, he apologized.
In the following dramatization,
we will see an older sister
applying the inspired words of Titus 2:3-5
in order to advise younger sisters
“to be sound in mind.”
We will also observe
how one of the younger sisters
avoids further problems
and pursues peace
by humbly apologizing.
I don’t know how this happened
but, Haley, I’m sorry.
It hurts me to see you so upset.
I can’t believe you two.
First,
what you heard
was not what I said.
Well, I thought that was how you felt.
And even if I got that part wrong,
all this drama?
Now stop!
Come on, girls.
Haley, come closer.
“Love is patient and kind.”
It’s not jealous.
It doesn’t become provoked,
even when things become difficult.
So, what are we going to do?
I just thought if—
No,
I’m sorry, Haley.
I’m sorry.
I shouldn’t have judged you so harshly.
I shouldn’t have judged you at all.
And I’m sorry for dragging you into this
by twisting what you said.
It’s OK; things happen.
I’ve been on both ends.
I should never have spoken
that way to you, Celia
—I mean, to either of you.
I’ve got to get home to Nana.
I’ll call you tomorrow.
Bye.
The older sister apologized,
even though she was not in the wrong.
She also urged
the two younger sisters to make peace.
It takes courage, humility,
and determination to apologize.
It’s interesting to note what’s stated
at Philippians 2:3:
“Do nothing out of contentiousness
or out of egotism,
but with humility
consider others superior to you.”
That means our determined effort
is not to win an argument,
which could be contentious,
nor do we want to start a discussion
with the primary thought being
that we are in the right.
That could mean
that we are self-concerned, or egotistical.
Rather, in harmony
with the principle of that scripture
we want to act with humility.
Our aim should be to pursue peace.
Even if we think the other person
is being unreasonable,
we apologize.
Why is it so important to do so?
Because that is what makes
our worship to Jehovah acceptable.
At Matthew chapter 5,
verses 23, 24,
Jesus makes it very clear:
“If, then, you are bringing
your gift to the altar
“and there you remember
that your brother has something against you,
“leave your gift there
in front of the altar,
“and go away.
“First make your peace with your brother,
and then come back and offer your gift.”
“One Bible scholar
describes the scene this way:
“‘The worshipper has entered the Temple;
“‘he has passed through [a] series of courts,
“‘the Court of the Gentiles,
“‘the Court of the Women,
the Court of the Men.
“‘Beyond that there lay
the Court of the Priests
“‘into which the layman could not go.
“‘The worshipper is standing at the rail,
“ready to hand over
his [living animal] to the priest.’ . . .
“At that [critical] moment,
the worshipper remembers
that his brother has something against him.”
What is he to do?
“Leave your gift there
in front of the altar,”
Jesus explains, “and go away.”
What does Jesus say is more important
than offering up a sacrifice?
‘First, make peace with your brother.
‘Then when you have come back,
offer up your gift.’
The expression rendered “make your peace”
means “to reconcile.”
Jesus’ words teach a crucial lesson:
Reconciliation, or peace,
comes before sacrifice.
The way we treat fellow worshippers
has a direct bearing
on our relationship with God.
First John 4:20 pointedly says:
“For the one who does not love his brother,
whom he has seen,
cannot love God,
whom he has not seen.”
If we find ourselves in a situation
where we have offended a fellow worshipper,
we want to apply Jesus’ counsel.
We want to take the initiative
to approach our brother or sister.
We may need
to acknowledge their hurt feelings.
We may also need to ask,
“What can I do to make amends?”
Often a sincere apology
is all that is needed.
Although our worship today
no longer includes animal sacrifices,
what Jesus was teaching
emphasizes that there is a connection
between peace with our brother
and acceptable worship to God.
When two humans are at odds,
there may be a measure
of blame on both sides,
since both are imperfect and prone to error.
This usually calls for mutual concessions.
Even if only the one apologizing is right,
the issue is not so much
who is right and who is wrong
but who will take the initiative
to make peace.
When the apostle Paul heard
that the Christians in Corinth
were taking fellow servants of God
to secular courts over personal differences,
he said:
“Why [do you] not
rather let [yourself] be wronged?
Why do you not
rather let [yourself] be defrauded?”
The principle is clear.
Peace among fellow believers
is more important than proving
who is right and who is wrong.
Keeping this in mind makes it easier
to apologize for a wrong
that someone thinks
we’ve committed against him or her.
A heartfelt apology can open the way
to a constructive conversation.
It can minimize problems
and restore peace.
Brother Leonard Myers,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“‘Seek Peace and Pursue It’ . . .
By Forgiving Freely.”